---
title: AI Image Processing with Azure OCR
image: /assets/images/gorilla-alien.webp
credit: Image generated by Chat GPT 4.0
author: Sam Schneider
categories:
  - ai
  - image-processing
layout: post
---

I was sitting in a small workshop at the 2016 Kansas City Developers conference. I had only been in the industry about a year and a half. A kid in his early twenties was standing at the front of the room, his voice almost shaking with nerves as he explained the use-cases of this new technology called "Docker" that was about to change the world. I suddenly understood in a moment that this would change everything. I had no idea how big my learning gap was, but I was determined to learn how to use Docker effectively. Over the course of two years I pushed through hours of screens where things just "didn't work." I dealt with co-workers laughing at me, saying, "Oh hey, something on Docker, you'll like this one Sam." But I was right. A few years later I was literally making over $100K more than I had been making before I became an expert in containers.

## A new revolution

Whether you like it or not, all developers are facing a revolution much bigger than the containerization revolution we just went through. ML models have been around since the 90s, but for the past 10 years being a developer was honestly more fun. You got to build real things that touched real people instead of fiddling around with data that no one would ever know you worked on.

Now those same boring models are threatening to replace most of the code you wrote as poetry, and there's nothing you can do about it. Business decision makers will cut costs and as soon as the models get good enough, your application development skills will be about as valuable as my Ubuntu firewall configuration skills.



