---
title: The Theory of Constraints and Software Engineering
image: /assets/images/arseny-togulev-WCqqJioFLZc-unsplash.jpg
credit: Photo by <a href="https://unsplash.com/@tetrakiss?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Arseny Togulev</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/photos/WCqqJioFLZc?utm_source=unsplash&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=creditCopyText">Unsplash</a>
author: Sam Schneider
categories:
  - philosophy
  - theory of constraints
layout: post
---

In 2012 I was on a trip from China to the United States and was sitting in a coffeeshop with a friend when he suddenly said, "You should read the book *The Goal*." When I went back to China, I asked my boss if he'd heard of the book. Not only had he heard of it, but he had a copy of it on his bookshelf. I borrowed it, and a few days later when I opened it, it changed my life.

*The Goal* is the most famous of Eliyahu M. Goldratt's books around his Theory of Constraints. It dovetails nicely with the concepts behind Lean Manufacturing, and hence is still commonly assigned reading in business schools. However, while the concepts of Lean Manufacturing penetrated deeply into the world of software thinking via [the Agile Manifesto](https://agilemanifesto.org/) in 2001, I have never yet heard anyone tie the concepts behind the Theory of Constraints to software. So I'll try it.

## What is the Theory of Constraints?

The Theory of Constraints is a logical thinking process that allows us to gain actionable insights from our intuition. However in most cases, following the logical process of the theory leads to the same conclusion in every industry: management is often focused on local optima. In manufacturing, factories usually measure the efficiency of each step in the process and assuming these will magically add up into a global improvement. In project management, projects are usually managed by looking at each branch of dependencies and measuring how many branches are off track instead of focusing on the health of the longest branch in the dependency chain. In marketing, it leads to pricing strategies based on the cost to manufacture goods plus some added profit instead of focusing on what the market wants, and tailoring the goods to this.

The Theory of Constraints is probably the best kept influential secret in business. A factory owner in China once explained it to me like this: "If you run a popular hamburger joint that sells only set meals and a salesman comes to you with a proposal to sell you fry machines for $20 each that can produce 100 boxes of fries per hour and new hamburger grills for $200 which can produce 100 hamburgers, how much should you buy of each? Your first thought might be that fries are way cheaper per unit and that you should buy more of these machines, but if you look at the operation as a whole, where you sell only set meals, having excess cheaply-manufactured fries sitting around is not only not helpful, at the end of the day, you have to throw them away. You should buy exactly the same amount of each machine since the hamburger making proces is the constraint of the system."

## What can it tell us about software?

Unfortunately Dr. Goldratt passed away in 2011 and while the concepts behind Lean Manufacturing have deeply penetrated software thinking through the Agile Manifesto in 2001 and the DevOps revolution in 2010, the concepts behind the Theory of Constraints are little discussed in the community.

Lean Manufacturing is all about reducing waste, but without careful thinking about the system as a whole it can lead to great improvements in a part of the system which have no outcome on the output of the system as a whole. In an agile approach to software, software teams are especially vulnerable to this. Agile methodologies such as Scrum provide excellent metrics on team performance, but provide no direction as to whether these improvements to the system had an affect on the system as a whole. The hope in Agile is that the Product Owner for the team will direct the team's development efforts to items which will help the business as a whole. [The Lean Startup](https://www.amazon.com/Lean-Startup-Entrepreneurs-Continuous-Innovation/dp/0670921602) by Eric Ries provides some excellent guidelines around how to do this.

Software engineers are famous for obsessing over their own specialities. In my experience it's quite common to assign busy work to an expert on an agile team so that they can continue in their area of expertise. "Sherry is an expert in Oracle databases, so let's have her get this 'nice to have' report knocked out this week. Having her learn how to fix the shopping cart display on the website is front end work and wouldn't be efficient for her to spend time learning it."

The Theory of Constraints gives us a way to take apart complex systems and processes looking for the "constraint" in the system, a single process which determines the output of the entire system. It argues that in any complex system there is rarely more than one constraint (and application across the world's factories has so far seemed to prove the theory). In software, we must learn to apply the same rigorous thinking to our software systems and processes.

## The software system

Software systems in most businesses are different from factories in that the constraint of the system is rarely the software's ability to process requests (caveat: it is for Google, Facebook, data mining companies, etc). Every production software system has a business goal. An invoicing system is meant to capture customer payments. An ecommerce website helps customers find and purchase what they want. While many metrics can make us feel good about ourselves (e.g. mean time to recovery, uptime percentages), these metrics only improve the system if they achieve the overall business goal for which the system was designed. Therefore it is important that we carefully choose the metrics which will tell us if our software system is fulfilling its purpose.

For an invoicing system, we should carefully track the number of invoices processed per day (and compare against previous periods). We should especially track any failures to process invoices, not only software error codes but also soft metrics such as how many invoices are opened, but not paid (abandoned). As engineers, we typically think about systems as individual components, but the system performance is the sum of the components and thus must be measured in this way.

Once we have identified metrics which tell us whether the system as a whole is achieving its goals, we then begin to prioritize all work in terms of how it will affect these metrics. Yes, minor UI fixes might not greatly move some of these numbers and they should still be done, but they must be prioritized in context of the system goals, and should still be measured carefully in terms of the system goals. UI changes can just as easily get in the way of the system goals as they can help them, such as incorrectly updating the checkout button link.

## The software development process

Besides looking at software systems as a whole, we can look at the software development process itself as a system with constraints. Software teams are assembled to work on real software. Therefore we can connect the team's output with the effect on the metrics for the software system they are producing. It is incredibly common on software teams to hear a developer say something like, "Feature x is done. I tested it last night," but when questioned they admit that feature x in only on their laptop. No one in the company has even seen the code they wrote.

Software teams must begin evaluating their output based not only on the software released to production but on the effect of their released code. Did it achieve the outcomes it was designed for? Did the percentage of abandoned carts decrease with the new icons? On average, how many minutes faster are we at diagnosing checkout failures after implementing Jaeger tracing?

These types of questions can receive push back from dev teams because it gives them responsibilities for which they do not believe they should be held responsible. To developers, "it's usually the Product team's fault." Once everyone is evaluated based on the actual outcome of the system the internals of the team changes. The engineers begin to raise concerns about Product definition, and even argue things like color choices. Back end engineers begin to volunteer for front end code reviews.

Of course, some engineers cannot stomach an environment where they are not allowed to hyper-specialize. Be ready to lose these people.

In my experience, every software team I've worked with has some kind of major constraint on their ability to deliver code to production quickly. When I start on the team, it's often something as simple as code reviews. Every developer is so focused on their local performance they don't take time to review each other's code, which causes pull requests to sit idle sometimes for multiple days. This problem is easy to fix. It usually just takes one developer to begin reviewing code within 1-2 hours and everyone else will follow suit. Code review delays are an artificial constraint however.

Once code review delays are fixed, the true constraints begin to surface. These usually take the form of either lack of experience with the technology being used, or a manual production release process. It is quite common for new projects to begin with technology to which the assembled team is relatively unfamiliar. In these cases, simple tasks like setting up a state store in a front end project can take days instead of hours. The danger here is that one of the devs will become an expert on the unfamiliar item and the other devs will rely on her instead of learning the area themselves. If local experts form and begin to play "king of the hill" with their knowledge fiefdoms, simple constraints will begin being baked into the fabric of the team itself. Forcing such devs to pair program in this area (or even just take a vacation) can easily break these constraints. Whatever you do, do not make these local area experts into heros. Call them heros when they cross train effectively.

The other kind of constraint, which is harder to fix, is that of a smooth release of code to production. This constraint is harder to fix because so many things play into it. First, if the team has written automated tests which do not give them confidence that the code actually works, you will NEVER achieve confident production releases. Second, the process of moving code from a developer's laptop to the production system must have no manual steps other than clicking "Approve for release" buttons. Otherwise everyone will be afraid that they are forgetting something and knowlege fiefdoms will arise in which only a single dev is trusted to do releases. Third, the process of "smoke testing" after a release must be well-documented (ideally it will be fully automated). If no one is quite sure how test that the system still works after a code change has gone out, there will always be an underlying fear to release.

Breaking a production system is the nightmare of every software developer. If the scariness is not systematically removed from the process, there will always be a mental block in the minds of development team members which causes them to put off releases.
