# Building a Bridge vs Fighting a Battle

If you’re trying to decide between a waterfall project planning approach and an agile planning approach, you need to have a good understanding of the problem domain you’re trying to solve. If your problem domain features a set of sequential, dependent steps with little chance for the dependencies or steps to change, then a waterfall approach is an excellent choice. Nay, it is the best choice. 

Waterfall, though often criticized, has one very beautiful characteristic: it allows you to give an estimated date of completion. The very nature of waterfall requires a date of completion. The date of completion is in fact what it produces. And humans love dates. July 4th (for the Americans). December 25th (for those who celebrate Christmas). Your birthday. What business executive can resist hearing the completion date of their project? It sounds good. It’s easy to imagine. It goes great on company quarterly reports. “Our project managers estimate that Project X will finish before Jan. 13 and under budget.” There is no greater sentence in all of business lore.

Waterfall is a little bit like an eager-to-please AI. It will always give you an answer, even if it’s completely wrong. But, like an eager-to-please AI, if the problem domain is easy, the answer is often correct. This can lead to problems for the user. First you ask, “When will you have the login page ready?” The waterfall spins, and answers, “In 12 workdays on May 11th.” The login page consists of a single developer working on an extremely well understood problem. The developer completes testing and hands over the project on May 10th.

Confidence builds in the executives. “Waterfall, waterfall, on the wall, when will the due date for middleware integration fall?” This time, the project consists of two teams in different companies tying together an unknown piece of software (to team A) into an unknown piece of software (to team B) with hundreds of unclear tasks and steps, many with hidden dependencies on the others. But the eager to please AI shouts, “Oh executives, July 12th is the fairest of them all.” July 12th goes into the quarterly report. The investors love it. Here is a company who can predict the future with confidence.

On June 15th, one of the developers sends an email. “Due to unforeseen integration challenges, we have some concerns about our ability to meet the July 12th deadline.” The email hits like a seagull crashing into a skyscraper. “What do you mean? There’s still a month out, go back and come up with a plan to meet the deadline!” The frightened developers have a meeting. “Guys, we can’t compromise on this deadline, how are we going to hit it?” One suggests foregoing 20% of the automated testing, and the proposal is accepted without question. Then everyone is asked to go back and re-evaluate their original estimates. They come back, and almost magically their new estimates hit the original date exactly. Another email goes out, “Problem solved. The developers have re-evaluated timelines and the original date is back on track.”

But like Sauron’s ring sitting in Gollum’s cave, the problem has not gone away. The same set of emails repeats 2 more times, each time, more of the safety net of testing and good architecture is done away with behind the scenes. Finally June 7th comes and it’s becoming clear that the dev team is less than 60% of the way through the integration. The executives are embarrassed toward the outside, and this makes them furious toward the inside. A tribunal is called and the project leaders are questioned. Oddly, their answers as to why the work was delayed are extremely logical and rest entirely on the fact of “unforeseen integration challenges.” The executives are placated, after all, none of them had foreseen these challenges. No one is fired. The next quarter’s report mentions the project scope having changed as the reason for the new deadline. Several more deadline cycles happen and the project is finally completed.

The problem in the above scenario is of course that waterfall tends to lie. It lies in much the same way as I would be lying if you asked me the weight of a jar of jelly beans and I told you 1.837485kg, when actually I had no idea. As humans, we are trained by scientific tools to believe that the more specific an answer, the more accurate it is. We are often fooled by the dates given by the waterfall process into thinking that such dates mean anything. Unfortunately the waterfall process relies ENTIRELY on the ability of the teams involved to accurately identify the exact steps involved, the dependencies between these steps, and what unforeseen issues may arise, such as as the star programmer being offered a job at Google.

So we come back to the question of problem domain. Some domains are well-understood and waterfall dates are often accurate. A well-known factory process can usually be estimated with accuracy because each step and each dependency is well-known. The amount of time for a package delivery is the same (unless it has to go through customs in a country known for bribery issues). Other problem domains are ridiculous to think that waterfall dates would have any ability to connect to reality. 

Can you imagine a Civil War general planning the battle of Gettysburg in a waterfall style? “On day one, Buford will engage enemy soldiers. This engagement is estimated to last a little over an hour. On day two the attacks will begin near Devil’s Den, but Little Round Top will be carried by Union soldiers. On day three, position the troops to counter Picket’s Charge.” If just a few of the predictions in a series of literally millions of events was wrong, the final day’s instructions might be to “attack left” when no enemy troops were present.

This is where agile comes in. It expresses hesitancy to give dates for large, unknown chunks of work, and instead tries to find a way to break a project into units of success which can deliver value to the company incrementally. While good agile methods do not give dates for projects with unknown dependencies and amounts of work, they do give extremely accurate dates for near-term objectives, which is actually based on historical performance of the teams doing the work. Many times, companies who embrace agile find that the dates to which they had so closely clung were nothing more than a comfort blanket. Often what they were actually looking for was transparency into the software development process and the ability to redirect the process when the fortunes of war changed.

All this is to say, if you’re building a bridge over a small river next to a bridge that was completed 10 years ago and well-documented, waterfall will probably give you an accurate date. If you’re fighting a battle with hundreds of thousands of individual combat events and decisions, you should use an agile methodology. Large software projects are more like battles than bridges.
